[Music]
when it comes to cloud infrastructure
virtual machine has been the go-to
standard for many of its advantages
however what if you had an alternative
to virtual machine that was more
lightweight economical and more scalable
that's exactly what tourists so docker
is a container based technology that
lets users develop distributed
applications now how are these two
different how do they complement each
other so this introduces the topic for
today's session that the stalker versus
virtual machine so hello everyone the
society on behalf of Freddy Rekha and
I'll be walking you to the session on
docker versus virtual machine
so thank you all the attendees for
joining in today's session so without
wasting any further time let's look into
the topics for today's session so we'll
start today's session by understanding
what is a virtual machine and then I'll
tell you the benefits of virtual machine
after understanding that I'll tell you
what I'll talk are containers and then
I'll tell you the benefits of docker
containers after an introduction of
virtual machine and docker containers
I'll tell you the difference between
docker containers and virtual machine
and then the uses of them alright guys
so is the agenda to everyone okay so
that's great so now let's get started
with the first topic for today's session
that is what is virtual machine a
virtual machine is an emulation of a
computer system in simple terms it makes
it possible to run what appears to be on
many separate computers on hardware that
is actually one computer the operating
systems and their applications share
hardware resources from a single host
server or from a pod of host servers
each virtual machine requires its own
underlying operating system and then the
hardware is virtualized not only this
but a hypervisor or a virtual machine
monitor is a software firmware or a
hardware that creates and runs virtual
machines it sits between the hardware
and the virtual machine and is necessary
to virtualize the server since the
advent of affordable virtualization
technology I
departments have embraced virtual
machines as the way to lower cost and
increase efficiencies now with the note
of this let me tell you the benefits of
virtual machines so the benefits of
virtual machines are mainly all the
operating system resources are available
to all the applications they have
established management and security
tools and not only this but they're
better known for security controls now
who are the popular virtual machine
providers
well the popular virtual machine
providers are vmware k vm virtualbox Xen
and hyper-v so now that you've
understood what is the virtual machine
let me tell you what docker containers
are so as we all know that docker is the
company driving the container movement
and the only container platform provided
to address every application across the
hybrid cloud with containers instead of
virtualizing the underlying computer
like a virtual machine only the
operating system is virtualized
container sit on the top of a physical
server and each container shares the
host operating system kernel and usually
the binaries and libraries to now
sharing the operating system resources
such as libraries significantly reduces
the need to reproduce the operating
system code and means that the server
can run multiple workloads with a single
operating system installation containers
are thus exceptionally light and they're
only megabytes in size and they just
take few seconds to start and contrast
with that virtual machines take minutes
to run and are an order of magnitude
larger than the equivalent container all
that the container requires is enough of
an operating system supporting programs
and libraries and a system resource to
run a specific program what this means
is that in practice you can put two to
three as many as applications in a
single server with containers that you
can with a virtual machine in addition
to this with containers you can create a
portable consistent operating
environments for development testing and
deployment
[Music]
so now that I've told you about
containers let me tell you the types of
containers so mainly there are two
different types of containers that is
the Linux container and the docker
containers so the Linux container is a
Linux operating system level
virtualization method for running
multiple isolated Linux systems on a
single host where ask doc has started as
a project to build single application
Linux containers introducing several
changes to the Linux containers that
make containers more portable and
flexible to use at a high level we can
say that docker is a Linux utility that
can efficiently create ship and run
containers so now that I've told you the
different types of containers let me
tell you the benefits of containers so
containers offer reduced IT management
resources they reduce the size of the
snapshots they are used in quicker
spinning of apps and they also make sure
that the security updates are reduced
and simplified and they also make sure
that there's less code to transfer
migrate and upload workloads now who are
the popular container providers
well the popular container providers are
the lyrics containers the docker and
Windows Server so now that I've told you
individually what a container is what a
virtual machine is and how do these to
work
[Music]
now let me show you the major
differences between docker containers
and virtual machines well the major
differences come with operating support
security portability and performance so
let's discuss each one of these terms
one by one and let's know the
differences between both of them so
let's start with the operating system
support the basic architecture of docker
containers and virtual machines differ
in their operating system supports
containers are hosted in a single
physical server with the host operating
system which is shared among them but
the virtual machines on the other hand
have a host operating system and an
individual guest operating system inside
each virtual machine irrespective of the
host operating system the guest
operating system can be anything like it
can be Linux Windows or any other
operating system now the docker
containers are suited for situations
where you want to run multiple
applications over a single operating
system kernel but if you have
applications or servers that need to run
on different operating system flavors
then virtual machines are required
sharing the host operating system
between the containers make them very
light and helps them to boot up in just
a few seconds hence the overhead to
manage the container system is very low
compared to that of virtual machines now
let's move to the second difference
status security in docker since the host
kernel is shared among the containers
the container technology has access to
the kernel subsystems as a result of
which a single vulnerable application
can hack the entire host server
providing root access to the
applications and running them with a
super user privileges is therefore not
recommended in docker containers because
of these security issues on the other
hand virtual machines are unique
instances with their own kernel and
security features they can therefore run
applications that need more privilege
and security now moving on to the third
difference that is portability docker
containers are self-contained packages
that can run the required application
since they do not have a separate guest
operating system they can
easily ported across different platforms
the containers can be started and
stopped in the matter of a few seconds
compared to that of vm's
due to the lightweight architecture this
makes it easy to deploy docker
containers quickly in service on the
other hand virtual machines are isolated
server instances with their own
operating system they cannot be ported
across multiple platforms without
incurring compatibility issues for
development purposes where the
applications have to be developed and
tested in different platforms docker
containers are the ideal choice now
let's move on to the final difference
that is performance docker and virtual
machines are intended for different
purposes so it's not fair to measure the
performance equally but the lightweight
architecture makes docker containers
less resource intensive than the virtual
machines as a result of which containers
can start up very fast compared to that
of virtual machines and also the
resource usage varies among the tube in
containers the resource usage such as
CPU memory input/output varies with the
load or traffic in it I like the case of
virtual machines there is no need to
allocate resources permanently to
containers scaling up and duplicating
the containers is also an easy task
compared to that of virtual machines as
there is no need to install an operating
system in them
[Music]
so now that I've told you the
differences between docker containers
and virtual machines let me show you a
real-life case study of how docker
containers and virtual machines can
complement each other so all of us know
PayPal right so PayPal provides online
payment solutions through their account
balances bank accounts credit cards or
promotional financing without sharing
the financial information today PayPal
is leveraging OpenStack for the private
clouds and runs more than one lakh
virtual machines now one of the biggest
desire of PayPal's business was to
modernize the data center infrastructure
making it more on demand improving its
security meeting compliance regulations
and also making everything
cost-efficient so they wanted to
refactor the existing Java and C++
legacy applications by dog arising them
and deploying them as containers this
called for a technology that provides a
distributed application deployment
architecture and can manage workloads
but must also be deployed in both
private and public cloud environments so
PayPal uses taka commercial solutions to
enable them to not only provide gains
for the developers in terms of
productivity and agility but also for
the infrastructure teams in the form of
cost efficiency and enterprise-grade
security the tools being used in
production today include docker
commercially supported engines docker
trusted registry and as well as talk a
compose the company believes that
containers and virtual machines can
coexist and thus they combine these two
technologies leveraging docker
containers and virtual machines together
gave PayPal the ability to run more
applications while reducing the number
of total virtual machines and also
optimizing their infrastructure this
also allowed PayPal to spin up new
applications much more quickly and also
on as needed basis since containers are
more lightweight and instantiate in a
fraction of second while watching
machines take minutes they can roll out
a new application instance quickly patch
up an existing application or even add
the capacity to compensate for peak
times
in the year so this helped paypal to
drive innovation and also outpaced the
competition's so guys that's how the
company gained the ability to scale
quickly and deploy faster with the help
of docker containers and virtual
machines so now let me summarize the
complete session in a minute for you so
daughter is a containerization app that
isolates applications at the software
level if a virtual machine is a house
then the docker container is a hotel
room if you do not like the setup then
you can always change the hotel room as
it is much easier than changing a house
isn't it so similarly as a hotel has
multiple rooms sharing the same
underlying infrastructure docker offers
the ability to run multiple applications
with the same host operating system and
sharing underlying resources now it is
often observed that some of them believe
that docker is better than a virtual
machine but we need to understand that
while having a lot of functionality and
being more efficient in running
applications docker cannot replace
virtual machines both containers and
virtual machines have their own benefits
and drawback and the ultimate decision
will depend on your specific needs but
let me also tell you that there's some
general rules of thumb that is what your
machines are a better choice for running
applications that require all of the
operating system resources and
functionalities well you need to run
multiple applications on servers or have
a wide variety of operating systems to
manage whereas the containers are a
better choice when your biggest priority
is to maximize the number of
applications running on a minimal number
of servers but in many situations the
ideal setup is to likely include both
with the current state of virtualization
technology the flexibility of virtual
machines and the minimal resource
requirements of containers work together
to provide environments with the maximum
functionality so guys that's all for
today's session I hope you found the
session informated thank you and have a
great day
I hope you have enjoyed listening to
this video please be kind enough to like
it and you can comment any of your
doubts and queries and we will reply
them at the earliest do look out for
more videos in our playlist and
subscribe to any Rekha channel to learn
more happy learning